Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: etomidate.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss etomidate. Tell me what it is and where it sits among the induction
agents.
Etomidate is an intravenous induction agent, a carboxylated imidazole derivative,
used to produce rapid hypnosis for the induction of anaesthesia.
It is a pure hypnotic with no analgesic action.
Its defining characteristic, and the reason it retains a place despite its
drawbacks, is its remarkable cardiovascular stability:
of the common induction agents it produces the least disturbance of blood pressure,
heart rate and cardiac output, which makes it valuable in the haemodynamically
compromised patient.
Against this must be set its principal liability,
the suppression of adrenocortical steroid synthesis,
which has restricted its use and generated lasting controversy.
So it is an agent of a specific niche — the unstable patient needing a single,
cardiovascularly gentle induction — rather than of routine practice.
Describe its structure and how it is presented.
Etomidate is a carboxylated imidazole, and it is chiral:
only the R-enantiomer is the active hypnotic,
and it is presented as the single active isomer.
The imidazole ring is important to both its actions — its hypnotic effect and its
inhibition of the steroid-synthesising enzyme.
It is poorly water-soluble, so the original and still common formulation dissolves
it in thirty-five per cent propylene glycol,
which is responsible for the pain on injection and the thrombophlebitis associated
with the drug, and contributes to a high incidence of nausea.
A lipid-emulsion formulation was developed to reduce the pain on injection and the
propylene-glycol load, analogous to the propofol emulsion.
So the formulation has been a focus of effort to mitigate the drug's local
side-effects.
What is its mechanism of action?
Like the other intravenous hypnotics,
etomidate acts principally by potentiating inhibitory transmission at the
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor,
the major inhibitory chloride channel of the central nervous system,
enhancing the action of gamma-aminobutyric acid and so increasing inhibitory tone
to produce hypnosis.
It binds at a site on the receptor that confers its particular profile.
It has no action at opioid or other analgesic systems,
so it provides hypnosis without analgesia.
The same imidazole structure that underlies its hypnotic action also,
unfortunately, inhibits a key enzyme of steroid synthesis,
which is the basis of its main adverse effect,
and these two actions are not readily separable in the parent molecule.
Take me through its pharmacokinetics.
Etomidate is highly lipophilic, so after an intravenous bolus it crosses the
blood-brain barrier rapidly and produces hypnosis within one arm-to-brain
circulation, in some thirty seconds.
Recovery from a single dose is by redistribution from the brain to the wider
tissues, giving a rapid wake-up comparable to the other induction agents.
It is metabolised rapidly, by ester hydrolysis in the liver and by plasma
esterases, to an inactive carboxylic-acid metabolite excreted in the urine.
Its clearance is high and its elimination half-life a few hours.
Although its kinetics would permit infusion,
with a relatively short context-sensitive half-time,
it is not used for maintenance because of the adrenal suppression,
which is the dominant consideration.
Describe its effects on the central nervous system.
Etomidate produces rapid, smooth hypnosis.
Like thiopental it reduces the cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen and,
through preserved coupling, cerebral blood flow,
cerebral blood volume and intracranial pressure,
while — because it maintains arterial pressure so well — it preserves or even
improves cerebral perfusion pressure,
a combination attractive in the brain-injured patient.
It has no analgesic effect.
Two central features are notable: it commonly causes involuntary excitatory
movements, myoclonus, on induction,
which are not epileptic but can be troublesome and are reduced by premedication
with an opioid or a benzodiazepine; and it produces activating,
epileptiform changes on the electroencephalogram,
so that it is useful for provoking and mapping seizure foci and is used in
electroconvulsive therapy, while being approached with some caution in epilepsy.
Now the cardiovascular effects — its principal advantage.
The outstanding feature of etomidate is its cardiovascular stability.
At an induction dose it produces minimal change in heart rate,
arterial blood pressure, systemic vascular resistance,
cardiac output and myocardial contractility,
in marked contrast to propofol and thiopental, which cause significant hypotension.
It does not greatly depress the myocardium and largely preserves the baroreflex and
sympathetic tone.
This makes it the induction agent of choice for many in the haemodynamically
fragile patient — those with limited cardiac reserve,
significant valvular disease such as aortic stenosis, hypovolaemia,
or cardiovascular instability — in whom the hypotension of other agents could be
dangerous.
This single advantage is the reason etomidate has survived in practice despite its
adrenal liability.
And the respiratory effects?
Etomidate causes less respiratory depression than propofol or thiopental.
There may be a brief period of apnoea or hypoventilation after induction,
particularly if it is given rapidly or with an opioid,
but in general respiratory drive is better preserved than with the other agents.
It does not cause significant histamine release,
so it does not provoke bronchospasm and is reasonably well tolerated in the atopic
or asthmatic patient.
So its respiratory profile, like its cardiovascular profile,
is comparatively gentle, which adds to its appeal for the compromised patient,
even though the airway must still be managed and ventilation supported as required.
What is its place — the indications for etomidate?
Its main indication is induction of anaesthesia where cardiovascular stability is
paramount: the patient with significant cardiac disease,
fixed-output states such as severe aortic stenosis, hypovolaemia or shock,
and the elderly or frail in whom the hypotension of other agents is hazardous.
It is used for rapid-sequence induction in such patients.
It is valued in electroconvulsive therapy because it provides hypnosis without
unduly shortening, and indeed may lengthen, the seizure.
And it is used to provoke seizure activity for electrocorticographic mapping in
epilepsy surgery. In all of these the use is as a single dose;
it is not used for maintenance or as an infusion because of the adrenal effect.
Give the induction dose.
The induction dose of etomidate is about three-tenths of a milligram per kilogram,
with a usual range of around two- to four-tenths, titrated to loss of consciousness.
As with the other agents the dose is reduced in the elderly and the compromised,
and it is given with attention to the pain on injection — using a large vein and
often a small dose of opioid beforehand both to reduce the pain and to attenuate
the myoclonus.
It is a single induction dose; repeat dosing and infusion are avoided.
Now its principal liability. Explain the adrenocortical suppression.
Etomidate inhibits the enzyme eleven-beta-hydroxylase,
and to a lesser extent seventeen-alpha-hydroxylase,
in the adrenal cortex — enzymes essential to the synthesis of cortisol and
aldosterone. The imidazole group binds the haem iron of these cytochrome enzymes.
The consequence is a dose-dependent suppression of cortisol synthesis that begins
after even a single induction dose and can persist for some hours to a day,
and which is profound and sustained if the drug is given by infusion.
In a patient who depends on an intact stress cortisol response — the critically
ill, the septic — this blunting of the cortisol response is potentially harmful,
and it is the central problem of the drug.
Tell me the history of the controversy and where the evidence now stands.
The concern arose when etomidate, used as a continuous sedative infusion in
intensive care in the early nineteen-eighties,
was associated with increased mortality, traced to adrenal suppression;
this ended its use for infusion and sedation.
The subsequent and continuing debate concerns whether even a single induction dose
is harmful, particularly in sepsis,
where some observational and trial evidence has linked single-dose etomidate to
measurable adrenal suppression and, in some analyses, to worse outcomes,
while other evidence has not shown a clear effect on mortality.
Major sepsis guidance has consequently advised caution,
and many avoid etomidate in the septic patient, choosing ketamine instead,
or give supplementary steroids if it is used.
The position is that infusion is firmly contraindicated,
and single-dose use in the critically ill, especially the septic,
is approached cautiously and often avoided.
What are its other adverse effects?
Besides adrenal suppression, etomidate causes pain on injection and
thrombophlebitis, attributable to the propylene-glycol solvent and reduced by the
lipid formulation and a large vein. It commonly causes involuntary excitatory
movements, myoclonus, on induction.
It has a high incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting,
higher than the other induction agents. It produces the activating
electroencephalographic changes already mentioned.
It does not cause significant histamine release and rarely causes anaphylaxis.
So its side-effect profile — pain, myoclonus, nausea and, above all,
adrenal suppression — is the price paid for its cardiovascular stability.
What are the contraindications and cautions?
Infusion or repeated dosing is contraindicated because of the cumulative adrenal
suppression. Single-dose use is approached with caution, and often avoided,
in the critically ill and particularly the septic patient, for the same reason,
with ketamine frequently preferred.
It is used cautiously in those with known adrenal insufficiency.
The propylene-glycol formulation is irritant, so a large vein is used.
As with other agents there is caution in porphyria.
And while it is used in electroconvulsive therapy and seizure mapping,
its activating effect prompts thought in the patient with epilepsy.
The recurring theme is the adrenal effect, which governs most of the cautions.
Compare etomidate with propofol, thiopental and ketamine for induction of the
unstable patient.
For the haemodynamically unstable patient,
propofol and thiopental are hazardous because of their vasodilatation and
myocardial depression. The realistic choice is between etomidate and ketamine.
Etomidate offers the greatest haemodynamic neutrality — little change in pressure,
rate or output — but at the cost of adrenal suppression,
which is a particular concern in sepsis.
Ketamine supports the circulation actively through sympathetic stimulation and adds
analgesia and bronchodilatation, but raises heart rate and pressure and may be
limited in the catecholamine-depleted.
So in the patient with critical cardiac disease or fixed output,
etomidate's neutrality is often preferred; in the septic or haemorrhaging patient,
ketamine is frequently chosen, with etomidate's adrenal effect a reason to avoid it
or to cover with steroids.
The decision is individualised.
Are there developments aimed at retaining the benefit without the adrenal
suppression?
Yes — the recognition that etomidate's cardiovascular stability is valuable but its
adrenal suppression is the obstacle has driven the design of analogues intended to
separate the two.
Methoxycarbonyl-etomidate is a soft-drug analogue,
rapidly hydrolysed by esterases to an inactive metabolite,
designed to be so short-acting that adrenal suppression is minimised;
and carboetomidate is an analogue with a modified ring that binds the adrenal
enzyme far less, retaining hypnosis with much reduced steroidogenic inhibition.
These remain investigational, but they illustrate rational drug design aimed
precisely at the drug's known weakness,
and the continuing interest in an agent that would offer etomidate's stability
without its liability.
Pull it together: when would you choose etomidate, and how would you use it safely?
I would choose etomidate for the single-dose induction of a haemodynamically
fragile patient in whom cardiovascular stability is the overriding priority —
significant cardiac disease, severe aortic stenosis,
limited reserve — valuing its near-neutral effect on pressure, rate and output,
and its preservation of cerebral perfusion pressure in the brain-injured.
I would use it as a single dose only, never as an infusion.
I would give it through a large vein,
often after a small dose of opioid to reduce pain and myoclonus,
and anticipate nausea.
I would be cautious, and would usually avoid it,
in the septic and critically ill because of adrenal suppression,
preferring ketamine or, if etomidate is used,
considering supplementary steroid cover.
Used in this disciplined way, it remains a valuable agent for a defined and
important indication.
Say more about the structure and why the imidazole ring is central.
Etomidate is an ethyl ester of a carboxylated imidazole.
The imidazole ring is the functional heart of the molecule:
it confers the pH-dependent solubility — water-soluble in acid,
lipophilic at body pH — that allows rapid central penetration,
and it mediates the binding that gives both the hypnotic action at the
gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor and, unfortunately,
the inhibition of the adrenal cytochrome enzymes,
because the imidazole nitrogen binds the haem iron of those enzymes.
So the same chemical feature responsible for the drug's usefulness is responsible
for its principal toxicity, which is precisely why analogues have been designed to
modify the ring and separate the two effects.
Describe the two formulations and their differences.
The original formulation dissolves etomidate in thirty-five per cent propylene
glycol, which is hyperosmolar and irritant, causing pain on injection,
thrombophlebitis and contributing to nausea.
A later lipid-emulsion formulation suspends the drug in a medium-chain and
long-chain triglyceride emulsion, analogous to the propofol vehicle,
which markedly reduces the pain on injection and the venous irritation and removes
the propylene-glycol load.
The lipid formulation does not alter the drug's pharmacology or its adrenal effect;
it simply mitigates the local injection-site problems.
Choosing the lipid emulsion and a large vein,
with a small dose of opioid beforehand,
is the practical way to reduce the discomfort and myoclonus of induction.
Give the pharmacokinetic detail — onset, binding and metabolism.
Etomidate is highly protein-bound, around three-quarters, mainly to albumin,
so the free fraction rises in hypoalbuminaemia.
Its onset is one arm-to-brain circulation, some thirty seconds,
with hypnosis lasting a few minutes after a single dose as it redistributes.
It is metabolised rapidly by ester hydrolysis,
by hepatic esterases and microsomal enzymes,
to an inactive carboxylic-acid metabolite that is excreted predominantly in the
urine, with a smaller biliary component. Clearance is high and the elimination
half-life a few hours.
Its kinetics are favourable for a single induction;
it is the pharmacodynamic adrenal effect, not the kinetics,
that forbids its use as an infusion.
What is its effect on intra-ocular pressure?
Etomidate lowers intra-ocular pressure, like the other intravenous hypnotics,
which is advantageous in ophthalmic anaesthesia and in the patient with a
penetrating eye injury, where a rise in intra-ocular pressure risks extrusion of
ocular contents.
The reduction is comparable to that produced by the other agents,
and it adds to the appeal of etomidate in the patient who is both cardiovascularly
fragile and has an eye injury, although the avoidance of coughing and the choice of
muscle relaxant matter at least as much in that setting.
Explain the myoclonus seen on induction and how it is managed.
Etomidate frequently produces involuntary muscle movements, myoclonus,
during induction — these are common and can be vigorous.
They are not epileptic seizures; they are thought to arise from disinhibition of
subcortical motor activity before full cortical depression is established,
an imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory influences during the transition to
unconsciousness.
They are clinically a nuisance, can interfere with intravenous access and
monitoring, and may be mistaken for seizures.
They are reduced by premedication with an opioid or a small dose of a
benzodiazepine before induction, and by giving the drug smoothly.
They are self-limiting and not harmful in themselves,
but their reduction improves the quality of induction.
Why does etomidate cause so much postoperative nausea and vomiting?
Etomidate has a notably higher incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting than
the other induction agents, particularly propofol, which has antiemetic properties.
The mechanism is not fully established but is attributed partly to the drug itself
and partly to the propylene-glycol vehicle,
with the lipid formulation associated with somewhat less nausea.
The high emetic incidence is a real disadvantage,
especially in day-case and at-risk patients,
and it is one of the reasons etomidate is reserved for situations where its
cardiovascular stability is genuinely needed rather than used routinely,
and a reason to give prophylactic antiemetics when it is used.
Expand on the mechanism, time course and extent of the adrenocortical suppression.
Etomidate inhibits the cytochrome enzyme eleven-beta-hydroxylase,
the final step in cortisol synthesis,
and to a lesser degree seventeen-alpha-hydroxylase,
by binding the haem iron of these adrenal enzymes through its imidazole group.
The result is a dose-dependent fall in cortisol production.
After a single induction dose this suppression is measurable for some hours and may
last up to a day, blunting the cortisol response to surgical or critical-illness
stress.
With a continuous infusion the suppression is profound and sustained,
which is what caused the excess mortality when etomidate was used for
intensive-care sedation. The aldosterone pathway is also affected.
The key clinical concern is the loss of an adequate stress cortisol response in the
patient who depends on it.
Describe the trial evidence on single-dose etomidate in sepsis and rapid-sequence
induction.
The evidence is mixed and much debated. Observational studies and some analyses
linked a single induction dose of etomidate in septic patients to measurable
adrenal suppression and, in some, to worse outcomes, prompting caution.
Randomised trials comparing etomidate with ketamine for emergency rapid-sequence
induction — such as the comparison of the two agents in critically ill patients —
found similar intubating conditions and no clear difference in mortality,
though etomidate produced more adrenal suppression.
Subgroup concerns persist in sepsis.
The consensus position is that infusion is contraindicated,
that a single dose causes transient adrenal suppression of uncertain clinical
importance, and that many clinicians avoid etomidate in the septic patient,
choosing ketamine, while others use it and consider steroid cover.
If etomidate is used in a patient at risk, would you give supplementary steroid?
This is an area of clinical judgement rather than firm proof.
Because a single dose transiently suppresses cortisol synthesis,
some clinicians give supplementary corticosteroid — a stress dose of hydrocortisone
— to a septic or critically ill patient who has received etomidate,
reasoning that it covers the period of suppressed synthesis.
The evidence that this improves outcome is not strong,
and the broader question of steroid therapy in sepsis is itself debated.
My approach would be to avoid etomidate where the adrenal effect is a particular
concern, choosing ketamine; and if etomidate were used in such a patient,
to be alert to the possible need for steroid support and to follow local
critical-care guidance.
The cleaner solution is usually to avoid the problem by agent choice.
What is the status of etomidate in porphyria and in the atopic patient?
Etomidate is generally regarded as safe in the porphyrias, unlike the barbiturates,
and is one of the agents that may be used for induction in the porphyric patient,
although propofol is also used; local porphyria guidance should be consulted.
In the atopic or asthmatic patient,
etomidate does not cause significant histamine release and rarely causes
anaphylaxis, so it does not provoke bronchospasm and is reasonably well tolerated
from that standpoint.
So its allergy and porphyria profile is favourable,
and these are not the reasons that limit its use — the adrenal effect is.
How is the absence of analgesia relevant to its use?
Etomidate is a pure hypnotic with no analgesic action,
so it does not blunt the cardiovascular and other responses to noxious stimulation
such as laryngoscopy and intubation.
An opioid must therefore be co-administered to provide analgesia and to attenuate
the pressor response to airway instrumentation,
which is particularly important in the very patients in whom etomidate is chosen —
those with cardiac disease in whom a hypertensive,
tachycardic response would be harmful.
The opioid also conveniently reduces the myoclonus.
So etomidate is used as part of a balanced induction, not alone,
and the analgesic component must be supplied separately.
Summarise the comparative profile of etomidate against the other induction agents
in a sentence or two for each domain.
For cardiovascular stability, etomidate is the best of the agents,
propofol and thiopental the worst, ketamine supportive but sympathomimetic.
For respiratory depression, etomidate and ketamine are gentler than propofol and
thiopental.
For cerebral effects, etomidate and thiopental reduce metabolic rate and
intracranial pressure, etomidate additionally preserving perfusion pressure,
whereas ketamine traditionally raised intracranial pressure.
For recovery quality, propofol is cleanest with antiemesis,
etomidate causes nausea and myoclonus, thiopental a hangover,
ketamine emergence phenomena.
For specific liabilities, etomidate suppresses the adrenal,
thiopental is contraindicated in porphyria, ketamine causes emergence phenomena.
Etomidate's niche is the haemodynamically fragile single induction.
How would you induce a patient with severe aortic stenosis using etomidate?
In severe aortic stenosis the priorities are to maintain systemic vascular
resistance and coronary perfusion, avoid tachycardia and hypotension,
and preserve sinus rhythm and adequate preload,
because the fixed obstruction limits the ability to increase output.
Etomidate suits this because of its haemodynamic neutrality.
After full monitoring — often with invasive arterial pressure — and adequate
intravenous access and pre-oxygenation,
I would give a titrated induction dose of etomidate,
around three-tenths of a milligram per kilogram, through a large vein,
with a small dose of opioid beforehand to blunt the pressor response and reduce
myoclonus, and a vasopressor such as phenylephrine immediately available to treat
any fall in resistance.
I would avoid agents and manoeuvres causing tachycardia or vasodilatation,
and maintain anaesthesia in a way that preserves these haemodynamic goals.
What practical steps reduce the unwanted effects of etomidate at induction?
Several. Using the lipid-emulsion formulation and a large vein reduces the pain on
injection and thrombophlebitis. A small dose of opioid, or a benzodiazepine,
before induction reduces both the pain response and the myoclonus.
Giving prophylactic antiemetics addresses the high incidence of nausea.
Co-administering an opioid supplies the analgesia the drug lacks and blunts the
airway response.
Reserving etomidate for single-dose induction, and not using it for maintenance,
avoids the cumulative adrenal suppression. And in the septic or critically ill,
choosing an alternative such as ketamine avoids the adrenal concern altogether.
These measures let the drug's cardiovascular advantage be used while minimising its
liabilities.
Where does the carboetomidate line of development stand conceptually?
The concept behind carboetomidate and the methoxycarbonyl analogues is to retain
etomidate's prized hypnotic and cardiovascular profile while abolishing the adrenal
suppression.
Carboetomidate replaces the imidazole nitrogen that binds the adrenal enzyme's haem
iron with a different group, so that it binds the steroidogenic enzymes far less
while still potentiating the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor — separating the
wanted from the unwanted action.
The methoxycarbonyl analogue takes a different route,
building in an ester bond for rapid esterase breakdown so that the drug is too
short-lived to suppress the adrenal, a soft-drug strategy.
Both are investigational, but they show that the drug's central weakness is,
in principle, a soluble design problem,
and that the demand for an etomidate-like agent without adrenal toxicity is real.
Expand on its electroencephalographic effects and its use in electroconvulsive
therapy.
Etomidate produces activating, epileptiform changes on the electroencephalogram and
lowers the seizure threshold, in contrast to thiopental and propofol which are
anticonvulsant. This has two consequences.
In electroconvulsive therapy, where an adequate seizure is part of the treatment,
etomidate is useful because it does not shorten, and may prolong,
the induced seizure, so it is chosen when other agents have given inadequate
seizures, accepting its haemodynamic and other trade-offs.
In epilepsy surgery, the same activating property is exploited to provoke and help
localise seizure foci during electrocorticographic mapping.
The corollary is a degree of caution in using etomidate in the patient with poorly
controlled epilepsy outside these deliberate applications,
although it is not strictly contraindicated.
Tell me the history of the intensive-care sedation disaster.
In the early nineteen-eighties etomidate was used as a continuous intravenous
sedative for ventilated patients in intensive care,
valued for its haemodynamic stability.
It was then observed that mortality was increased among patients sedated with
etomidate infusions, and the excess was traced to its suppression of adrenocortical
steroid synthesis, leaving critically ill patients unable to mount an adequate
cortisol response.
This recognition ended the use of etomidate for infusion and sedation altogether,
and it is the origin of the whole adrenal controversy.
The episode is a salutary example of a drug's pharmacodynamic side-effect,
harmless in a single dose but lethal when sustained,
being uncovered only through outcome data in the sickest patients.
How long does adrenal suppression last after a single induction dose,
and does it matter in the fit patient?
After a single induction dose, cortisol synthesis is suppressed for a number of
hours, commonly cited as up to around a day, before recovering.
In the fit patient undergoing routine surgery,
who has intact adrenal reserve and a modest stress,
this transient suppression is generally of no clinical consequence,
and etomidate has been used safely for single-dose induction for decades.
The concern is confined to the patient who depends critically on a brisk stress
cortisol response — the septic and the critically ill — in whom even transient
suppression may matter.
So the clinical importance of the single-dose effect is a function of the patient's
physiological reserve, which is why the debate centres on sepsis and critical
illness.
How is etomidate used, or avoided, in trauma rapid-sequence induction today?
Etomidate was for a long time a popular agent for emergency rapid-sequence
induction in the injured and shocked,
precisely because of its haemodynamic stability.
The recognition of adrenal suppression,
and concern in the frequently septic or critically ill trauma population,
has tempered this, and many services now favour ketamine for emergency
rapid-sequence induction, valuing its cardiovascular support and analgesia without
the adrenal effect.
Where etomidate is used, it is as a single dose with awareness of the transient
adrenal suppression.
So current practice is a movement, not absolute,
away from etomidate towards ketamine for the emergency induction of the unstable
patient, with the choice influenced by local protocols and the individual case.
Describe the venous sequelae and how you minimise them.
The propylene-glycol formulation is irritant and hyperosmolar,
causing pain on injection and, with repeated or prolonged contact,
superficial thrombophlebitis along the vein.
These are minimised by using the lipid-emulsion formulation,
which is far less irritant; by injecting into a large vein with good flow rather
than a small peripheral one; by a preceding small dose of opioid or lidocaine to
reduce the pain; and by flushing afterwards.
They are not usually serious, but they are unpleasant for the patient and
avoidable, and attention to them improves the quality of induction with this agent.
Why is etomidate presented as a single enantiomer, and what follows?
Etomidate has a chiral centre, and only the R-enantiomer possesses the hypnotic
activity, so it is presented as the pure R-isomer rather than as a racemate —
giving the active drug without the inactive enantiomer that would otherwise be a
needless load.
This is an example of the chiral-switch principle applied from the outset.
It does not separate the hypnotic from the adrenal action, however,
since both reside in the same molecule through the imidazole ring;
separating those two effects requires the structural modifications of the
experimental analogues rather than a change of enantiomer.
How would you adjust etomidate use in the elderly and frail?
In the elderly and frail the induction dose is reduced,
because of increased sensitivity, a smaller central volume of distribution and
slower redistribution, and reduced physiological reserve,
so a smaller dose given more slowly achieves the desired effect while avoiding the
exaggerated, if modest, cardiovascular and respiratory depression.
Etomidate's haemodynamic stability is itself an advantage in this group,
in whom the hypotension of propofol or thiopental is poorly tolerated,
which is part of why it is chosen for the frail cardiac patient.
The myoclonus and nausea remain considerations,
and the usual measures — a preceding opioid and prophylactic antiemetic — are
applied. As always, the dose is titrated to effect rather than given as a fixed
bolus.
Pull together the profile of the ideal etomidate patient.
The ideal candidate is the haemodynamically fragile patient requiring a single-dose
induction in whom cardiovascular stability is the overriding concern — significant
ischaemic or valvular heart disease, severe aortic stenosis,
limited cardiac reserve, the elderly frail cardiac patient,
or the patient with a combination of cardiac disease and raised intracranial or
intra-ocular pressure, where etomidate's preservation of perfusion pressure is a
further advantage.
I would pair it with an opioid for analgesia and to blunt the airway response and
myoclonus, give an antiemetic, use the lipid formulation in a large vein,
and use it as a single dose only.
I would steer away from etomidate, towards ketamine,
in the septic and critically ill, where the adrenal suppression is a genuine
concern, and I would never use it as an infusion.
And briefly, what monitoring and preparation accompany its use?
I would attach full standard monitoring — oximetry, electrocardiography,
capnography and blood pressure — and in the cardiovascularly fragile patient for
whom etomidate is chosen, often invasive arterial pressure monitoring established
before induction.
I would secure good intravenous access in a large vein, pre-oxygenate,
and have a vasopressor and the means to support ventilation immediately available,
together with the co-administered opioid and an antiemetic.
Although etomidate is haemodynamically stable,
the patients selected for it are not,
so the preparation is that appropriate to a high-risk induction.
This careful preparation lets its cardiovascular advantage be realised safely in
the very patients who need it.
Compare etomidate and thiopental specifically for neuroanaesthesia.
Both reduce cerebral metabolic rate, cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure,
so both are theoretically attractive for the patient with raised intracranial
pressure.
The decisive difference is the systemic haemodynamics:
thiopental lowers arterial pressure and therefore threatens cerebral perfusion
pressure, whereas etomidate preserves arterial pressure and so maintains or
improves cerebral perfusion pressure,
which is the quantity that matters for the injured brain.
Etomidate therefore offers the cerebral metabolic benefits without the perfusion
penalty, an advantage in the haemodynamically marginal neurosurgical or
head-injured patient.
Against this stand etomidate's adrenal suppression,
its myoclonus and its activating effect on the electroencephalogram,
so the choice still balances these liabilities against its cerebral and
cardiovascular advantages.
What co-administration and interaction considerations apply to etomidate?
Etomidate is given as part of a balanced induction,
so an opioid is co-administered to supply the analgesia it lacks,
to blunt the pressor response to laryngoscopy, and to reduce the myoclonus;
a small dose of benzodiazepine may also reduce myoclonus.
Its central depression is additive with that of other anaesthetic agents and
opioids, allowing dose reduction. Being metabolised by esterases and hepatic
enzymes, it is not the focus of major metabolic interactions in single-dose use.
The most clinically important consideration is not a classical drug interaction but
the adrenal suppression, which interacts, in effect,
with the patient's need for a stress cortisol response,
and which may prompt steroid supplementation in the at-risk patient.
Can etomidate cause allergic reactions?
Etomidate does not cause significant histamine release,
and serious hypersensitivity to it is rare — rarer than with some other induction
agents — which is part of why it is reasonably tolerated in the atopic and
asthmatic patient.
True anaphylaxis to etomidate is recognised but very uncommon.
Any suspected anaphylaxis at induction is managed along the standard lines,
with adrenaline, oxygen and fluids,
followed by timed tryptase samples and later allergy investigation to identify the
culprit, since several agents are given together at induction.
So while no agent is entirely free of the risk,
etomidate's low propensity for histamine release and hypersensitivity is one of its
minor advantages.
Is there a role for etomidate in brief procedures such as cardioversion?
Etomidate can be used to provide brief anaesthesia for short procedures requiring
deep but transient hypnosis, such as electrical cardioversion,
where its rapid onset, quick single-dose recovery by redistribution and, above all,
its cardiovascular stability are advantageous in a patient who may already have
cardiac disease and a compromised circulation.
The myoclonus and the high incidence of nausea are relative drawbacks in this
elective setting, and propofol is often preferred for routine cardioversion in the
stable patient because of its cleaner recovery.
So etomidate is a reasonable choice for brief procedural anaesthesia when
haemodynamic stability is the priority, as a single dose,
while propofol suits the haemodynamically robust patient where recovery quality
dominates.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Etomidate is a carboxylated imidazole hypnotic (no analgesia) whose defining
merit is outstanding cardiovascular stability,
making it valuable for inducing the haemodynamically fragile patient.
Second, It potentiates GABA-A like other hypnotics,
but its imidazole ring also inhibits 11-beta-hydroxylase,
suppressing cortisol synthesis after even a single dose — the basis of its
controversy.
Third, Infusion is contraindicated (mortality from adrenal suppression);
single-dose use is approached cautiously and often avoided in sepsis,
where ketamine is frequently preferred.
Fourth, It reduces CMRO2, CBF and ICP while preserving cerebral perfusion pressure,
and is useful in ECT and seizure mapping, but causes myoclonus,
injection pain (propylene glycol) and notable PONV.
Fifth, For the unstable patient the real choice is etomidate (haemodynamic
neutrality, adrenal cost) versus ketamine (active circulatory support);
soft analogues such as MOC-etomidate aim to keep the benefit without the adrenal
effect.
Thank you. That concludes the station.